---
title: SEO vs SEM
author: Sameen
---

SEO- Search Engine Optimization.

Heard of the word SEO quite often? Know the full form, yet can’t really figure much beyond that. Well, this article is all that you need to understand SEO in simple, fun yet informative way. Google works quite like a democracy, there is a voting system and the one with more votes wins. The result on top of the google page is the winner from other search results. Why? Is it because it has the best piece of information regarding our search? No. Because it has paid Google more money? No. The answer is because it has got more votes. Votes here refer to words.

Google pick on words, it shows results in order of priority with the article that has most number of words relating to our searched ‘word’. For eg. If we searched ‘business’, the article-link topping the results will have the word ‘business’ more than other articles relating to this word. Now, this article can be about anything and may not be exactly for what we are looking, but mostly people will click on the first or second result.

So, the search engine –gives the best result-based on our needs-this is called search engine optimization. We use phrases in search engines now, to get a more accurate result. Search engine optimization is done with phrases as well.

Now we know why there are so many hue and cries about SEO based articles, because without that, are articles will go unnoticed if published online. However this is not the only thing through which search engine filters results, it performs few other actions as well; like crawling, indexing, processing, calculating, relevancy, and retrieving. The first step is crawling where a software called spider, crawl the web to see the information. They follow links from page to page and index everything on their way. There may be over billion pages on web so the spider may not visit a site every day. Spiders unlike humans won’t notice how presentable a site looks as in wont see flash, images, frames, password protected pages and directories. So we need to be careful in planning out our pages so that they are not missing from search engines.

Now let’s pay heed to some other benefits of SEO: a) The keywords would optimise the search to a target audience which will get to know/see what they want. Prospective visitors will become customers which will lead to increased sales. b) The more the visibility the more the audience, it will get both global and local recognition via target/selected keywords. c) It promises long term positioning. SEO is an economical marketing strategy for maximum exposure of the website. Everything comes with its set of cons, so here are some of SEO: 1. Upfront cost, there are long term benefits of course but you need to pay for it first. 2. SEO depends on algorithm, which the search engines changes as per their like. 3. SEO is time consuming. 5. If the website’s main page is in the end, one will be at a loss. 6. SEO works better with phrases than one word. Now, a question is often raised whether SEO is better or SEM (Search Engine Marketing). Both pull traffic, however SEO is part of the process and SEM has many tools added to it like:

<ul class="listItem style12">
	<li>Pay per click.</li>
	<li>Paid inclusion and trusted fees program.</li>
	<li>Link popularity.</li>
</ul>

SEO vs. SEM 1) SEM starts yielding results immediately but is a short-term investment. SEO on the other hand reaps benefits forever. 2) Organic (SEO) allures more visitors than Non-Organic; Paid (SEM). 3) SEM can be targeted to specific geographic areas whereas SEO targets a specific city or country. So we can now conclude that just the content is not important, it has to be SEO based. Otherwise what’s the point of an article that won’t have readers? SEO is an art one needs to embed in one’s writing. After all, the secret to creativity is knowing how to sell yourself.